## Put Granny to the test

> _"There are two hard things in computer science: cache invalidation, naming things, and off-by-one errors."_ - Derivation of a quote from [Phil Karlton](http://karlton.hamilton.com/)

I thought it may be a good idea to kick off today's chapter with a joke as we'll cover a topic that many developers still see as an unpleasant necessity and a rather dull and boring topic: **unit tests**. It would be a wild shot to think I can change that perception, but if I can convince some of you to embrace unit testing right from the beginning of your next development project than I'm happy.

The way I see it unit tests are simply part of the job and if you take the time to develop the habit it helps you in coding more efficiently and - yes - faster, not to mention that it adds to better code quality!  In the previous chapters we have completely refactored the domain/persistence model and given that this is the foundation of our application it sounds like a good idea to make sure it works as expected. Or, in other words:

> _"If a program feature lacks an automated test, we assume it doesn&rsquo;t work."_ - from [JUnit: A Cook's Tour](http://junit.sourceforge.net/doc/cookstour/cookstour.htm)


As I'll point out, the [Spring framework](http://www.springsource.org/spring-framework) used in the [Enterprise Granny application](https://github.com/SAP/cloud-enterprise-granny) comes with great support for [JUnit](http://junit.org/) and in most cases it will be quicker to test your code by running it as a JUnit test than deploying it to your server and testing it there. As such, I often develop new functionality in parallel to setting up the corresponding unit test - simply to speed up the process. Let's have a closer look what needs to be done to setup a unit test with Spring...

### JUnit Tests in Spring

I'll only explain the most basic things that need to be done, so if you want more information please consult the corresponding [documentation](http://static.springsource.org/spring/docs/2.5.6/reference/testing.html#unit-testing). In a nutshell, the basic layout of a JUnit test looks as outlined below:

```java
package com.example.foo;

import org.junit.Test;
import org.junit.runner.RunWith;
import org.junit.runners.JUnit4;

/**
* Tests for {@link Foo}.
*/
@RunWith(JUnit4.class)
public class FooTest
{
    @Test
    public void testSomething()
    {
          // ...
    }
}
```

In a Spring-based application there are only a few changes to this simple layout:

*   instead of using the regular `JUnit4` runner class a special `SpringJUnit4ClassRunner` is used so that Spring can do the necessary bootstrapping (e.g. loading the application context) and provide the Dependency Injection features (for more details please refer to [this documentation](http://static.springsource.org/spring/docs/2.5.6/reference/testing.html#testcontext-junit4-runner).)
*   we need to provide a reference to our application context configuration via the `@ContextConfiguration` annotation at class level.

That's it! With that we have a template to execute unit tests and benefit from all the Spring framework features. Let's have a look at the (skeleton of the) unit test we created for the [ContactDAO](https://github.com/SAP/cloud-enterprise-granny/blob/master/src/main/java/com/sap/hana/cloud/samples/granny/dao/ContactDAOImpl.java) class:

```java
package com.sap.hana.cloud.samples.granny.dao;

// import statements

/**
* Tests for the {@link ContactDAO} class. 
*/
@ContextConfiguration("classpath:/META-INF/spring/app-context.xml")
@RunWith(SpringJUnit4ClassRunner.class)
@ActiveProfiles(profiles = "test")
public class TestContactDAO
{
          @Autowired
          ContactDAO contactDAO = null;
          
          /**
           * Tests the CRUD operations.
           */
          @Test
          @Transactional

          public void testCRUD()
          {
                    // ...
          }

          /**
           * Tests concurrent modification of an object.
           */

         @Test
          public void testOptimisticLocking()
          {
                  // ...
          }

          /**
           * Tests the query for contacts based on a given country.
           */
          @Test
          @Transactional
          public void testfindByAddressCountryQuery()
          {
                    // ...
          }

          /**
           * Creates a demo test {@link Contact}.
           *
           * @return A test {@link Contact}
           */
          static Contact createTestContact()
          {
                    // ...
          }
}
```
(The complete source can be found [here](https://github.com/SAP/cloud-enterprise-granny/blob/master/src/test/java/com/sap/hana/cloud/samples/granny/dao/TestContactDAO.java).)

Let's discuss a couple of note-worthy things in the following sub-chapters...

#### ContextConfiguration (Line 8)

Via the `@ContextConfiguration` annotation we specify the location of our Spring application context configuration. In this scenario we'll simply point it to the regular `app-context.xml` file (which is the same we specified in the [web.xml](https://github.com/SAP/cloud-enterprise-granny/blob/master/src/main/webapp/WEB-INF/web.xml)). This way, our unit test will use the exact same configuration as the application itself.  In some scenarios it may be necessary/preferable to provide a dedicated application configuration for unit tests (e.g. different database etc), and hence this feature comes in handy. I have explicitly opted to use the regular configuration and work around the issue of different environments by other means, which are explained next.

#### ActiveProfiles (Line 10)

One of the most [recent features](http://static.springsource.org/spring/docs/3.2.x/spring-framework-reference/html/new-in-3.1.html) of Spring is the so-called [environment abstraction](http://blog.springsource.com/2011/02/11/spring-framework-3-1-m1-released/):

> _"One of our most frequent requests has been to provide a mechanism in the core container that allows for registration of different beans in different environments. The word 'environment' can mean different things to different users, but a typical scenario might be registering monitoring infrastructure only when deploying an application into a performance environment, or registering customized implementations of beans for customer A vs. customer B deployments. Perhaps one of the most common cases would be working against a standalone datasource in development vs looking up that same datasource from JNDI when in QA or production. Bean definition profiles represent a general-purpose way to satisfy use cases of this kind, and we'll explore the latter use case in the examples below."_ - Chris Beams, [Spring framework blog](http://blog.springsource.com/2011/02/11/spring-framework-3-1-m1-released/)

I have used this approach to define two different `DataSource`s: one for our web application (using the `DataSource` obtained from JNDI as declared in the `web.xml`) and one for our unit test (which starts up an in-memory [Derby](http://db.apache.org/derby/) instance.) Take a look at the bottom of the [app-context.xml](https://github.com/SAP/cloud-enterprise-granny/blob/master/src/main/resources/META-INF/spring/app-context.xml) file to see how the two profiles are set-up:

```xml
<beans profile="dev, prod" >
    <jee:jndi-lookup id="dataSource" jndi-name="java:comp/env/jdbc/DefaultDB" />
</beans>

<beans profile="test">
    <bean id="dataSource" destroy-method="close" class="org.apache.commons.dbcp.BasicDataSource">
        <property name="driverClassName" value="org.apache.derby.jdbc.EmbeddedDriver"/>
        <property name="url" value="jdbc:derby:memory:DemoDB;create=true"/>
        <property name="username" value="demo"/><property name="password" value="demo"/>
    </bean>
</beans>
```

Consequently, I have declared that the unit test should be run using "test" as the active profile. In the web.xml I have defined that the "prod" profile should be used:

```xml
<context-param>
  <param-name>spring.profiles.activ</param-name>
  <param-value>prod</param-value>
</context-param>
```

Ultimately, we want our application to be environment-aware. For that purpose, we could implement a programmatic approach of defining the active profile(s) by implementing the [ApplicationContextInitializer](http://static.springsource.org/spring/docs/3.1.x/javadoc-api/org/springframework/context/ApplicationContextInitializer.html) interface and wiring it up in the`web.xml` as follows:

```xml
<context-param>
  <param-name>contextInitializerClasses</param-name>
  <param-value>...</param-value>
</context-param>
```

We'll touch that topic agin in a later chapter and then I'll also show you how-to obtain some environment information about your SAP HANA Cloud Platform account.

#### Dependency Injection (Lines 13,14)

As you can see we can make use of the general DI features of Spring. Here, we use the `@Autowired` annotation to instruct Spring to inject the implementation of the `ContactDAO` interface during runtime.

#### CRUD Test (Lines 19-21)

Here, we have defined our test case for the CRUD operations. In order to flag it as a JUnit test we annotated it with `@Test`. Please also note the `@Transactional` annotation, which results in the automatic creation of a transaction for the given method. While that may not be necessary within the context of a unit test running in an in-memory database (which is only alive during the execution of the unit test) I wanted to demonstrate best-practices here.

#### OptimisticLocking Test (Lines 29, 30)

This unit test verifies that the OptimisticLocking approach we implemented in [chapter 5](/05.md). To mimic a situation of a concurrent access I have omitted the `@Transactional` annotation on purpose.

### Wrap-up

That's pretty much all there is to know to get started with unit tests. Maybe one last remark, following the Maven conventions the unit test should reside in the `src/test/java` source code folder to clearly separate the unit tests from the rest of the application (residing in `src/main/java`).

Granny will take a well-deserved break now, but don't worry, we'll be right back in a few weeks and then we'll really kick it up a notch and do some more interesting things again. Here's an outlook of what'll be up to next:

*   implement a RESTful API (including some discussions about hypermedia-driven APIs including [HATEOAS](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HATEOAS) and [HAL](http://stateless.co/hal_specification.html))
*   implement validation based on [JSR-303](http://beanvalidation.org/1.0/spec/) and introduce proper (error) message handling
*   implement a nice looking UI
*   ...

I hope to see you all back after the break! In the meanwhile, have a great summer and ... **happy coding! **For those that may want to take a sneak peak of what's coming, you can check out [this branch](https://github.com/SAP/cloud-enterprise-granny/tree/sneak-peak) - please note that it's a work in progress though!

**PS:** I got some feedback stating that the web application wasn't running anymore since our refactoring of the domain/entity model. True! At this point the application is in rather bad shape and a lot of the fundamentals are still not in place. As such it may not be a great idea to publish the application on the web as-is! Anyway, and while hurts to admit after all this writing about doing "things properly" I have come up with a "**wild hack**" that makes the original web application _work_ somewhat with the new data model. Use it if you must, but keep in mind this is just a temporary hack that may work for the straightforward case, but it is certainly not a good example! </span>

Or in short: **do as I say, not as I do!** ! ;)</span>
</body>
